Modify rule S5486: Adapt to LaYC (#2751)
SonarSource/rspec: rules/S5486/cfamily/rule.adoc

> "pthread_mutex_t" should not be consecutively locked or unlocked twice

Reviewer: This for me suggest that this rule works only if two locks are placed one after the another. Which is not the case.

Reviewer: I think all synonyms of consecutively will have the same issues. Maybe something like more descriptive:
> locked twice, without being unlocked in between, or unlocked twice, without being locked in between.

== Why is this an issue?

_Mutexes_ are synchronization primitives that allow to manage concurrency.

> * _non recursive mutexes_ are targeted by this rule.

Reviewer: I think to make that statement, you should explain what recursive on non-recursive mutexes are. 
I think I would suggest going with a description, starting with explaining critical section, and how mutexes are used to create it.

For example, something like, to be reworded
1. When a program run multiple threads, multiple threads may at the same time access (concurrently) the same data or other resources. Such concurrent access needs to be avoided...., and here come mutext.
2. Then how mutexes are used to create critical section (with code examples).
3. The go into locking.

In general, when writing rspec, I would think what kind of programmer would actually read 
"why this is an issue?" section. Somoene who understands concepts like recursive mutext, will not bother to checking why locking twice is an problem.

Author: I think it makes sense. Have a look at how I incorporated this suggestion.

"pthread_mutex_t" should not be locked twice, without being unlocked in between,
or unlocked twice, without being locked in between

== Why is this an issue?

_Mutexes_ are synchronization primitives that allow to manage concurrency.
This is the most fundamental building block for creating _safe_ concurrent
applications.
By using a _mutex_, one can ensure that a block of code is executed by a
single thread concurrently. When calling member functions or modifying their
internal representations, data structures are designed to maintain their
invariants. If a data structure is accessed concurrently, and one of the
accesses is a write operation, then it has a _data race_.
Having _data races_ is _undefined behavior_, and usually leads to data
corruption or even corrupt the control-flow.

Adversaries actively exploit data races to take over systems, but _data races_
are also a common source of _data corruption_ in concurrent applications
resulting in dormant and hard-to-find bugs.

To prevent _data races_, the shared resource (usually memory) must be protected
by obtaining mutual access to the data during both reading and writing.

> Such mutual exclusion is generally achieved by using a _mutex_, which is
> frequently referred to as a _lock_.

Reviewer 2: That's fine. I can only suggest a shorter expression
```suggestion
Such mutual exclusion is generally achieved by using a _mutex_, also known as _"lock"_.
```
But I just wanted to make sure the "which is ... referred to" is indeed applied to the "mutex" and the "action of achieving mutual exclusion".

A _mutex_ has two states: _acquired_ and _released_.
Initially, they are _released_, but after calling ``++lock++``, they become
_acquired_ by _blocking_ the execution until they can _acquire_ the lock
if some thread already _acquired_ it. Once we _acquired_ the _lock_, and we are
done mutating or reading the shared resource, we need to _release_ it by calling
``++unlock++``.
Note that calling ``++lock++`` on a mutex that we already _acquired_, causes the
thread to block indefinitely, which is called _deadlock_.
Calling ``++unlock++`` on a mutex that is already _released_ is _undefined behavior_
in most implementations, thus, should be avoided.

The section of code for which the _mutex_ is _acquired_ is called the _critical section_.
Inside the _critical section_, we are the only one who has access to the shared resource.
Thus we are free to mutate or read it without considering what other threads are doing
concurrently. However, having large _critical sections_ can prevent other threads
from making progress if they want to also _acquire_ the same _mutex_ and access
the shared resource.

> Consequently, _critical sections_ are supposed to be as small as possible.

Author: Move to the "extra mile" section, as-is.

[source,c]
----
#include <pthread.h>
#include <stdbool.h>

int input;
int result;
bool isFib;

// Guards both 'num1' and 'num2'.
pthread_mutex_t m = PTHREAD_MUTEX_INITIALIZER;

int fibonacci(int n);
int factorial(int n);

void locks(bool calcFib, int n) {
  // Do the calculations without taking the lock.
  int res;
  if (calcFib) {
    res = fibonacci(n);
  } else {
    res = factorial(n);
  }

  pthread_mutex_lock(&m);
  // Critical section starts
  input = n;
  result = res;
  isFib = calcFib;
  // Critical section ends.
  pthread_mutex_unlock(&m);
}
----

=== What is the potential impact?

Locking an _acquired_ mutex leads to a _deadlock_, as a mutex can only be obtained once.

> Unlocking a _released_ mutex is _undefined behavior_.

Reviewer 2: In other rules, we add a sentence about what is _undefined behavior_ really about. like

> This means the compiler is not bound by the language standard anymore and your program has no meaning assigned to it.

e.g. [S3529](https://github.com/SonarSource/rspec/blob/cfb0d089bbf1141761208c5908d80486489b3620/rules/S3529/cfamily/rule.adoc#what-is-the-potential-impact)

And add possible concrete consequences if any. Concrete examples of undefined behavior have more impact on the reader

Reviewer 2: I do not know any specifics, so I would just add the sentence cited above (as the reader might not know what "undefined behavior" means and hos bad it is)

Removing synchronization can cause _data races_, leading to _data corruption_,
which adversaries might leverage to take over the system.

=== Exceptions

There are _recursive mutexes_ that can be _acquired_ multiple times by the same
thread, given that just as many times we also _release_ the _mutex_.
They are rare in practice and usually signal design problems in the code.
Thus we assume ``++pthread_mutex_t++`` refers to _non-recursive_ mutexes.

== How to fix it

Never lock an _acquired_ mutex.
Lock the mutexes in a strict order that is followed throughout the project.
Unlock operations should be done the same way but in reversed order.

=== Code examples

==== Noncompliant code example

[source,cpp,diff-id=1,diff-type=noncompliant]
----
#include <pthread.h>

pthread_mutex_t m1 = PTHREAD_MUTEX_INITIALIZER;
pthread_mutex_t m2 = PTHREAD_MUTEX_INITIALIZER;

void locks() {
  pthread_mutex_lock(&m1);

>   pthread_mutex_lock(&m1);

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  pthread_mutex_lock(&m1); // Noncompliant: m1 is already locked
```

}

void unlocks() {
  pthread_mutex_unlock(&m1);

>   pthread_mutex_unlock(&m1);

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  pthread_mutex_unlock(&m1); // Noncompliant: m1 is already unlocked
```

}
----

==== Compliant solution

[source,cpp,diff-id=1,diff-type=compliant]
----
#include <pthread.h>

pthread_mutex_t m1 = PTHREAD_MUTEX_INITIALIZER;
pthread_mutex_t m2 = PTHREAD_MUTEX_INITIALIZER;

void locks() {
  pthread_mutex_lock(&m1);

>   pthread_mutex_lock(&m2);

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  pthread_mutex_lock(&m2); // Compliant: m1 is locked, but m2 is not
```

}

void unlocks() {
  pthread_mutex_unlock(&m1);

>   pthread_mutex_unlock(&m2);

Reviewer 2: Didn't you write above that it should be in reverse order? This might be confusing

}
----

=== Pitfalls

Calling arbitrary functions while holding a lock should be avoided,
as the function might also want to lock the resource we already acquired,
causing a deadlock. One particular example of such functions is callbacks.

[source,c]
----
#include <pthread.h>

pthread_mutex_t m = PTHREAD_MUTEX_INITIALIZER;

void handle_callback(void (*callback)(void)) {
  pthread_mutex_lock(&m);

>   callback(); // If locks mutex 'm', then we have a deadlock.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  callback(); // If tries to lock mutex 'm', then we have a deadlock.
```

Reviewer 2: since `m` is already locked, `callback` cannot lock it. It can call `lock` which will block until it can lock the mutex (which will never happen). I call that "try to lock" because it will try, but it can't succeed, and it is the trying that leads to deadlock

Author: Indeed, I thought I can abbreviate things and I meant by "locks" here that it "calls lock".
I feel it's bikeshedding, but whatever.

  pthread_mutex_unlock(&m);
}
----

> == Resources

Reviewer 2: Please format the links according to https://github.com/SonarSource/rspec/blob/master/docs/link_formatting.adoc

Reviewer 2: I was primarily referring to the hyperlink being on the title, and not the source. Here is an [example](https://github.com/SonarSource/rspec/blob/a6984ff38766deefba7a7fe7fb38ce27ab22814f/rules/S1232/cfamily/rule.adoc#resources)

`grep` is not effective at the moment because most of our rules follow an outdated format.

For CWE, we do not need to mention MITRE, just CWE as a source, and the naked number as the subject title prefix, see [this example](https://github.com/SonarSource/rspec/pull/2596/files#diff-399a5f611cc941a3a4072b888d23eeba6341ccf6fc42e0850c2435d3f321f73fR273)

Author: Thanks for the clarification. Now it makes sense.

> "pthread_mutex_t" should not be locked when already locked, or unlocked when already unlocked

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
"pthread_mutex_t" should not be locked when already locked, or unlocked when already unlocked.
```

== Why is this an issue?

_Mutexes_ are synchronization primitives that allow to manage concurrency.
This is the most fundamental building block for creating _safe_ concurrent applications.
By using a _mutex_, one can ensure that a block of code is executed by a single thread concurrently.

> Data structures are designed to maintain their invariants in member-function calls while modifying their internal representation.

Reviewer 2: This still sounds odd to me, because you usually can't maintain an invariant while modifying internal representation. That's why member-functions are necessary: to maintain invariant between the calls, and encapsulate the code where the invariant is broken. How about dropping the second part here:
```suggestion
Data structures are designed to maintain their invariants between member-function calls.
```

If a data structure is accessed concurrently, and one of the accesses is a write operation, then it has a _data race_.
Having _data races_ is _undefined behavior_.

Adversaries actively exploit _data races_ to take over systems, but _data races_
are also a common source of _data corruption_ in concurrent applications
resulting in dormant and hard-to-find bugs.

To prevent _data races_, the shared resource (usually memory) must be protected
by obtaining mutual access to the data during both reading and writing.
Such mutual exclusion is generally achieved by using a _mutex_, which is
frequently referred to as a _lock_.

> A _mutex_ has two states: _released_ - which is the initial state, or _acquired_. +
> These are the possible transitions when calling ``lock`` or ``unlock`` on a _mutex_ in a given state:

Reviewer 2: Here is my summary of your description of the mental model for dealing with mutexes.
With this preamble, the table below looks correct to me.
Let me know if this summary matches your thinking.
```suggestion
A _mutex_ has two states: _released_ - which is the initial state, or _acquired_.
You can abstract away the concurrent thread sharing the mutex and think of it as owned by the current thread:
it never spontaneously changes between acquired and released.
In this view, these are the possible transitions when calling ``lock`` or ``unlock`` on a _mutex_ in a given state:
```

"pthread_mutex_t" should not be locked when already locked, or unlocked when already unlocked.

== Why is this an issue?

_Mutexes_ are synchronization primitives that allow to manage concurrency.
This is the most fundamental building block for creating _safe_ concurrent applications.
By using a _mutex_, one can ensure that a block of code is executed by a single thread concurrently.
Data structures are designed to maintain their invariants between member-function calls.
If a data structure is accessed concurrently, and one of the accesses is a write operation, then it has a _data race_.
Having _data races_ is _undefined behavior_.

Adversaries actively exploit _data races_ to take over systems, but _data races_
are also a common source of _data corruption_ in concurrent applications
resulting in dormant and hard-to-find bugs.

To prevent _data races_, the shared resource (usually memory) must be protected
by obtaining mutual access to the data during both reading and writing.
Such mutual exclusion is generally achieved by using a _mutex_, which is
frequently referred to as a _lock_.

A _mutex_ has two states: _released_ - which is the initial state, or _acquired_.

> You can abstract away the concurrent thread sharing the mutex and think of it as owned by the current thread.

Reviewer 2: Is there any value in restricting the number of concurrent threads? If not, just use plural
```suggestion
You can abstract away the concurrent threads sharing the mutex and think of it as owned by the current thread.
```

It never spontaneously changes between _acquired_ and _released_.

In this view, these are the possible transitions when calling ``lock`` or ``unlock`` on a _mutex_ in a given state:

. _released_ + ``lock()``   => _acquired_ ^(*)^
. _acquired_ + ``unlock()`` => _released_
. _acquired_ + ``lock()``   => _deadlock_
. _released_ + ``unlock()`` => _undefined behavior_

(*): When a thread locks a mutex, another thread trying to _acquire_ the same mutex will be _blocked_ and have to wait for the first thread to _release_ it.
This waiting period can take some time.

> If a thread attempts to lock a mutex it has already acquired, it will _deadlock_ because it would need to release it to lock it again.

Reviewer 2: It is confusing to put into the footnote for the first row the situation describing the third row.

What do you think of
- having two footnotes - for first and third rows, or
- adding it as a standalone sentence in a separate pararaph?

Reviewer 2: Looks good

To effectively protect the shared resource from concurrent accesses, all such accesses should be guarded by the same _mutex_.

> They need to _lock_ the _mutex_ to gain _safe_ exclusive access to the resource and _unlock_ it after they are done mutating or reading it.

Reviewer 2: It looks like the "punchline" of this section - "why this is an issue" - is the end of the footnote `(*)`, and then it is followed by a generic statement of why mutexes are useful.
Yet, this paragraph is (more) relevant where you introduce the mutex states.

If you agree that this is an issue, I propose to rearrange the paragraphs:
1. two states of the mutex
2. use of mutexes for protection of resource access
3. mental model of mutex state evolution
4. table of state transitions
5. footnote
6. > If a thread attempts to lock a mutex it has already acquired, it will _deadlock_ because it would need to release it to lock it again.

Author: I agree that the paragraph "To effectively protect..." is at a weird place.

It took me a while to understand that all you want is to move the paragraph "To effectively protect..." in between the "A _mutex_ has two states:..." and "You can abstract away the concurrent threads...".

I've moved the paragraph.

=== What is the potential impact?

Locking an _acquired_ mutex leads to a _deadlock_, as a mutex can only be obtained once.
Unlocking a _released_ mutex is _undefined behavior_.
Removing synchronization can cause _data races_, leading to _data corruption_,
which adversaries might leverage to take over the system.

=== Exceptions

There are _recursive mutexes_ that can be _acquired_ multiple times by the same
thread, given that just as many times we also _release_ the _mutex_.
They are rare in practice and usually signal design problems in the code.
Thus we assume ``++pthread_mutex_t++`` refers to _non-recursive_ mutexes.

== How to fix it

Never lock an _acquired_ mutex.
Lock the mutexes in a strict order that is followed throughout the project.
Unlock operations should be done the same way but in reversed order.

=== Code examples

==== Noncompliant code example

[source,cpp,diff-id=1,diff-type=noncompliant]
----
#include <pthread.h>

pthread_mutex_t m1 = PTHREAD_MUTEX_INITIALIZER;
pthread_mutex_t m2 = PTHREAD_MUTEX_INITIALIZER;

void locks() {
  pthread_mutex_lock(&m1);

>   pthread_mutex_lock(&m1); // Noncompliant: m1 is already locked

Reviewer 2: Other than the rule summary and title (which are identical), this is the first time you use "locked". In the "Why this is an issue" you've used the term "acquired" instead. Should we speak about "acquired" instead of locked here as well?
Or perhaps, use "locked" everywhere, and maybe mention that it is also called "acquired"?

Author: Added the sentence "These two states are frequently called _unlocked_ and _locked_ as well." after introducing the term "acquired" to clarify this.
Also now using "acquired" and "released" in the "Noncompliant" comments.

  pthread_mutex_unlock(&m);
}
----

=== Going the extra mile

The section of code for which the _mutex_ is _acquired_ is called the _critical section_.
Inside the _critical section_, we are the only ones with access to the shared resource.
Thus we are free to mutate or read it without considering what other threads are doing
concurrently. However, having large _critical sections_ can prevent other threads
from making progress if they want to also _acquire_ the same _mutex_ and access
the shared resource.
Consequently, _critical sections_ are supposed to be as small as possible.

[source,c]
----
#include <pthread.h>
#include <stdbool.h>

int input;
int result;
bool isFib;

// Guards both 'num1' and 'num2'.
pthread_mutex_t m = PTHREAD_MUTEX_INITIALIZER;

int fibonacci(int n);
int factorial(int n);

void locks(bool calcFib, int n) {
  // Do the calculations without taking the lock.
  int res;
  if (calcFib) {
    res = fibonacci(n);
  } else {
    res = factorial(n);
  }

  pthread_mutex_lock(&m);
  // Critical section starts
  input = n;
  result = res;
  isFib = calcFib;
  // Critical section ends.
  pthread_mutex_unlock(&m);
}
----

== Resources

> === External coding guidelines

Reviewer: I think this should be the standards section.

Author: I followed what is present in S836, where CWE was part of the "External coding guidelines" section.
I've moved my CWE to the "Standards" section, as suggested. Thanks.

Speaking of sibling sections, does the order matter?
For example, I mention "Standards" and then, "Related rules" and then "Documentation".
While in the rspec reference they are mentioned in this order:
> Resources (optional)
>  - Documentation   <---
>  - Articles & blog posts
>  - Conference presentations
>  - Standards   <---
>  - External coding guidelines
>  - Benchmarks
>  - Related rules   <---

> "pthread_mutex_t" should not be locked when already locked, or unlocked when already unlocked.

Reviewer 2: I believe we use double quotes for code only in the title and the messages. In the rule description you can enjoy the proper formatting
```suggestion
`pthread_mutex_t` should not be locked when already locked, or unlocked when already unlocked.
```

Such mutual exclusion is generally achieved by using a _mutex_, which is
frequently referred to as a _lock_.

A _mutex_ has two states: _released_ - which is the initial state, or _acquired_. +
These are the possible transitions when calling ``lock`` or ``unlock`` on a _mutex_ in a given state:

. _released_ + ``lock()``   => _acquired_ ^(*)^
. _acquired_ + ``unlock()`` => _released_
. _acquired_ + ``lock()``   => _deadlock_

> . _released_ + ``unlock()`` => _undefined behavior_

Reviewer 2: This is much more clear, thanks!

Since the case you are describing in (*) corresponds to "acquired + lock" (it was acquired by another thread before it had a chance to finish lock), I would move the (*) to the third line "acquired + lock", in this case, it will block and wait.
in the (*) you can note that if no one releases the mutex during this waiting, it is called a "deadlock".

So, if the mutex was locked by a different thread, it is fine, the thread that locked it will likely unlock it eventually.
However, if the mutex was locked by this same thread, it has no one to rescue it.

(*): Some thread might have _locked_ the mutex, thus our thread needs to _block_, and wait for that thread to _unlock_ the _mutex_. This might take a while.

> A consequence of this blocking behavior is why calling ``lock`` on a _mutex_ that is already _acquired_ by our thread will result in _deadlock_ because it would block until the _mutex_ becomes _available_, which will never happen.

Reviewer 2: This sentence is too long, it overflows my reading buffer

Reviewer 2: Or maybe it is malformed:
"A consequence of ... is why calling ... because it would ..., which will ..." - something is amiss.

Author: I think I addressed this one. Let me know if you like it.

=== is related to: S5489

> === on 6 Nov 2019, 23:32:48 Loïc Joly wrote:

Reviewer 2: "is related to XXXX" is an artifact of the migration. I agree that it is better placed in the metadata, but that's an improvement for another day
